RFC-018: initial research of BLS signature aggregation (#8358)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/rfc/rfc-018-bls-agg-exploration.md

# RFC 018: BLS Signature Aggregation Exploration

## Changelog

- 01-April-2022: Initial draft (@williambanfield).
- 15-April-2022: Draft complete (@williambanfield).

## Abstract

## Background

### Glossary

The terms that are attached to these types of cryptographic signing systems
become confusing quickly. Different sources appear to use slightly different
meanings of each term and this can certainly add to the confusion. Below is
a brief glossary that may be helpful in 

* **Multi-Signature**: A signature generated over a single message
where, given the message and signature, a verifier is able to determine
that each party signed the message as well as which parties signed the message.
May be short or may vary with number of signers.
* **Aggregated Signature**: A _short_ signature generated over messages with
possibly different content where, given the messages and signature, a verifier

> should be able to determine that each party signed the designated messages.

Author: Ah, yes that's correct.

* **Threshold Signature**: A _short_ signature generated from multiple signers
where, given a message and the signature, a verifier is able to determine that
a large enough share of the parties signed the message. The identifies of the
parties that contributed to the signature are not revealed.
* **BLS Signature**: An elliptic-curve pairing based signature system that
has some nice properties for short multi-signatures. May stand for

> *Boneh-Lynn-Schacham* or *Barreto-Lynn-Scott* depending on the context. A

Author: It's probably a bit ambiguous, but I'd guess that most people are intending to refer to *Boneh-Lynn-Schacham*. BLS curves, of which BLS12-381 is one, refers to the specific _family of curves_ discovered by *Barreto-Lynn-Scott* described [in this paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2002/088.pdf) and *Boneh-Lynn-Schacham* described the [mechanism for generating a short signature using elliptic curve pairing](https://www.iacr.org/archive/asiacrypt2001/22480516.pdf). So, a BLS 'signature' probably refers to the group who came up with the type of signing scheme. 

None of this is helped by the fact that wikipedia lists *Boneh-Lynn-Schacham* as the referent and then proceeds to link to *Barreto-Lynn-Scott* in the [citation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BLS_digital_signature#cite_note-1).

> *Boneh-Lynn-Schacham* or *Barreto-Lynn-Scott* depending on the context. A

Reviewer: It sounds like for our purposes, it's fine to assume these are related-enough that "BLS" is a safe catchall. I mainly wanted to avert any potential confusion if there were multiple variants of the algorithm.

and verifying that a given solution is correct.

Pairing-based cryptography works by operating on mathematical functions that
satisfy the property of 'bilinear mapping'. This property is satisfied for
functions `e` with values `P`, `Q`, and `R` where `e(P, Q + R) = e(P, Q) * e(P, R)`
and `e(P + Q, R) = e(P, R) * e(Q, R)`. The most familiar example of this is
exponentiation. Written in common notation, P^(Q+R) = P^Q * P^R.

Pairing-based elliptic-curve cryptography creates a bilinear mapping using
an elliptic-curve. With some original curve, you can define two groups,
`G1` and `G2` which are points of the original curve _modulo_ different values.
Finally, you define a third group `Gt`, where points from `G1` and `G2` satisfy
the property of bilinearity with `Gt`. In this scheme, the function `e` takes
as inputs points in `G1` and `G2` and outputs values in `Gt`. Succintly, given
some point `P` in `G1` and some point `Q` in `G1`, `e(P, Q) = C` where `C` is in `Gt`.
You can efficiently compute the mapping of points in `G1` and `G2` into `Gt`,
but you cannot efficiently determine what points were summed and paired to
produce the value in `Gt`.

> Functions are then defined to map digital signatures, messages, and keys into

Reviewer: I think what you have here is actually fine.

and out of points of `G1` or `G2` and signature verification is the process
of calculating if a set of values representing a message, public key, and digital
signature produce the same value in `Gt` through `e`.

Signatures can be created as either points in `G1` with public keys being
created as points in `G2` or vice versa. For the case of BLS12-381, the popular
curve used, points in `G1` are represented with 48 bytes and points in `G2` are
represented with 96 bytes. It is up to the implementer of the cryptosystem to
decide which should be larger, the public keys or the signatures.

BLS signatures rely on pairing-based elliptic-curve cryptography to produce
various types of signatures. For a more in-depth but still high level discussion
pairing-based elliptic-curve cryptography, see Vitalik Buterin's post on

> [Exploring Elliptic Curve Pairings][vitalik-curve-post]. For much more in
> depth discussion, see the specific paper on BLS12-381, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Exploring Elliptic Curve Pairings][vitalik-curve-post]. For much more in-depth discussion, see the specific paper on BLS12-381, 
```

[Compact Multi-Signatures for Smaller Blockchains][multi-signatures-smaller-blockchains].

### Adoption

BLS signatures have already gained traction within several popular projects.

* Algorand is working on an implementation.
* [Zcash][zcash-adoption] has adopted BLS12-381 into the protocol.
* [Ethereum 2.0][eth-2-adoption] has adopted BLS12-381 into the protocol.
* [Chia Network][chia-adoption] has adopted BLS for signing blocks.
* [Ostracon][line-ostracon-pr], a fork of Tendermint has adopted BLS for signing blocks.

### What systems may be affected by adding aggregated signatures?

#### Gossip

> Gossip could be updated to aggregate vote signatures during a consensus round.

Reviewer: Apart from the overhead, this would also be a significant expansion of the gossip protocol's sphere of responsibility: In addition to knowing who the peers are, and what messages to send and/or request from them, it would also have to gain a lot more knowledge about message contents, and integrate with code for constructing and aggregating cryptographic signatures. That further connects it to concerns about key management that seem out-of-place for a communications layer.

Author: Yes, I definitely agree that it would expand the responsibilities of the gossip layer. _If_ that expansion and complexity confers serious benefit we should consider it.

Reviewer 2: Well, this is only partially true. The consensus layer only relays messages that were verified by the consensus layer, that is, which signatures are valid. While this verification is done gone at "gossip level", it determines the operation of the gossip layer. In fact, in the current implementation, the separation between gossip and protocol layers is merely in terms of organization, as the gossip layer does not operate independently of the associate protocol.

Author: Sure, I agree that the gossip layer holds some responsibility for _what_ to relay, it does not, at the moment, modify the data it receives from consensus. It simply determines _who_ to send _what_ to. This would include additional capabilities and responsibilities for aggregating and storing data that it currently does not perform.

This appears to be of frankly little utility. Creating an aggregated signature
incurs overhead, so frequently re-aggregating may incur a significant
overhead. How costly this is is still subject to further investigation and
performance testing.

> Each validator will still need to receive vote extension data
> from the peer validators in order for consensus to proceed. As a result, any
> advantage gained by aggregating signatures across the vote message will be
> nullified as a result of the addition of vote extensions.

Reviewer: (optional fiddling)

```suggestion
Even if vote signatures were aggregated before gossip, each validator would still
need to receive and verify vote extension data from each (individual) peer validator in 
order for consensus to proceed. That displaces any advantage gained by aggregating signatures across the vote message in the presence of vote extensions.
```

#### Block Creation

> When creating a block, the proposer may create a small set of short

Reviewer: Is "short" necessary here? I can see why it would be desirable, but is it a constraint?

Reviewer: Also: A _set_ of multi-signatures?  What are the elements of (the/each) multi-sig in this case? Other validators? Why would there be more than one such set?

(Not saying there isn't a reason, but I don't know what it is)

Author: > Is "short" necessary here? I can see why it would be desirable, but is it a constraint?

No, it is not a constraint. You could certainly create a multi-signature that is linear size in the number of signers. Creating a short signature is, imo, one of the most desirable qualities of BLS signatures but not necessarily a requirement of adopting this scheme.

>  A set of multi-signatures? What are the elements of (the/each) multi-sig in this case? Other validators? Why would there be more than one such set?

I believe that this question relates somewhat to a proposed implementation. The section on feasibility, I believe, touches on why this would be a set of multi-signatures. We currently include both the 'yea' and the 'nay' signatures in the block. The 'set' of multi-signatures I was considering was one signature for the yeas and one for the nays. All of the yeas sign over identical bytes and same for the nays. 

This information is currently encoded in the [CommitSig.BlockIDFlag](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/851c0dc4f3088723c724cb01c4877ee78c3d6ffc/types/block.go#L589) field.

Reviewer: > We currently include both the 'yea' and the 'nay' signatures in the block. The 'set' of multi-signatures I was considering was one signature for the yeas and one for the nays.

I saw that later and thought it might be related to this, but I forgot to come back and add a note. 🙂

multi-signatures and attach these to the block instead of including one
signature per validator.

#### Block Verification

> Verification of blocks would not verify a set of many signatures. Verification
> would instead check the single multi-signature using the public keys stored
> by the validator. Currently, we verify each validator signature using
> the public key associated with that validator.

Reviewer: An ordering suggestion:

```suggestion
Currently, we verify each validator signature using the public key associated
with that validator.  With signature aggregation, verification of blocks would
not verify many signatures individually, but would instead check the (single) 
multi-signature using the public keys stored by the validator. 
```

Relatedly: The title of the doc talks about BLS signature _aggregation_, but aggregation is defined as implying no confirmation of signer identity. I think in this context we would actually _need_ identity, right?

Author: > Relatedly: The title of the doc talks about BLS signature aggregation, but aggregation is defined as implying no confirmation of signer identity. I think in this context we would actually need identity, right?

Yes, we would require some way of being able to identify the signers. I think this is described in the section on feasibility of implementation, let me know if not.

#### IBC Relaying

> IBC would no longer need to transmit a large set of signatures when

Reviewer: How large are these sets today, broadly?

Author: @colin-axner do you have insight into this? I'm not certain off the top of my head.

updating state. These state updates do not happen for every IBC packet, only
when changing an IBC light client's view of the counterparty chain's state.

> General [packets][ibc-packet] only contain enough information to correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
General [IBC packets][ibc-packet] only contain enough information to correctly
```

route the data to the counterparty chain.

> IBC does persist commit signatures to the chain in these `MsgUpdateClient`
> message when updating state. This message would no longer need the full set
> of unique signatures and would instead only need one signature for all of the
> data in the header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IBC does persist commit signatures to the chain in a `MsgUpdateClient`
message when updating state. This message would no longer need the full set
of unique signatures, but would instead only need one aggregated signature for
all of the data in the header.
```

Not sure: Is aggregated sufficient here, or is an identifying multi-signature needed?

Author: That's a good question. I _believe_ you need to know _which_ validators signed the block, but I'm not certain of that offhand. After an initial review by our team, I'd like to expand this out to the IBC team to provide additional feedback and advice where possible so hopefully this can be addressed then.

Reviewer: My thought was along similar lines—I expect you'd need to know the identities of the validators, since how else would you match votes to voting power to check 2/3+? Given that how much VP a validator has can change over time.

Author: Yes, in my sketch of an implementation, I believe this would look like including that `BitArray` of which validators were included in the signature so that IBC could check which validator votes were contained in the signature.

Reviewer: That makes sense. In which case I think we _do_ need to be able to identify signers.

Author: To clarify, the bit array would allow us to identify signers, if I'm understanding you correctly. Basically, you need the bit array to identify which subset, `S`, of the validators included signatures in the aggregated signature. You then perform an aggregate verification with the public keys of all members of `S`.

Reviewer: Got it. So we really _do_ need to keep the individual keys, so that we can choose which ones to use for verifying the aggregate signature.

Author: Yes, that's correct.

Reviewer 3: In the `MsgUpdateClient` the relayers include a `Header` field, which in the case of a normal light client update is of [type `Header`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/main/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/tendermint.pb.go#L187-L204). And this type includes the current validator set with the voting power of each validator, which is used in the light client verification algorithm.

Reviewer 4: So if I understand correctly, `MsgUpdateClient` would need to additionally take in a bit array to select which validators from the passed in validator set is a signer of the aggregate signature?

> And this type includes the current validator set with the voting power of each validator, which is used in the light client verification algorithm.

This is correct. The full validator set will need to be passed in though to pass the [valSet hash check](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/cbae5f9f5336bd9882cb0b02912f7ae948fac5b4/light/verifier.go#L266), so the bit array would still be necessary

Adding BLS signatures would create a new signature type that must be
understood by the IBC module and by the relayers. For some operations, such
as state updates, the set of data written into the chain and received by the

> IBC module would be slightly smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IBC module could be slightly smaller.
```

After all, many chains don't have that many validators to begin with (even big networks seem typically to concentrate voting power in a relatively small set of approved validators).

## Discussion

### What are the proposed benefits to aggregated signatures?

#### Reduce Block Size

> At the moment, the commit size contains a 512 bit signature for each validator
> that voted for the block. For the cosmos hub, which has 175 validators in the
> validator set, this amounts to about 11kb per block. That is around 113 GB over
> the lifetime of the chain's 10118561 blocks. (Note, the hub has increased the
> number of validators in the set over time so the signature size over the history
> of the chain is likely less than that value). 

Reviewer: Suggestions, re: significant figures, units.

```suggestion
At the moment, a commit contains a 64-byte (512-bit) signature for each validator
that voted for the block. For the Cosmos Hub, which has 175 validators in the
active set, this amounts to about 11 KiB per block. That gives an upper bound of
around 113 GiB over the lifetime of the chain's 10.12M blocks. (Note, the hub has
increased the number of validators in the active set over time so the total
signature size over the history of the chain is likely somewhat less than that).
```

Interesting to consider too that, while probably a lot of block data is compressible, cryptographic signatures generally won't be.

> Signature aggregation would only produce two signatures for the entire block.
> One for the yays and one for the nays. Each BLS aggregated signature is 48
> bytes, per the [IETF standard of BLS signatures][bls-ietf-ecdsa-compare].
> Over the lifetime of the same cosmos hub chain, that would amount to about 1
> GB, a savings of 112 GB. While that is a large factor of reduction it's worth
> bearing in mind that, at [GCP's cost][gcp-storage-pricing] of $.026 USD per GB,
> that is a total savings of around $2.50 per month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signature aggregation would only produce two signatures for the entire block:
One for the yeas and one for the nays. Each BLS aggregated signature is 48
bytes, per the [IETF standard of BLS signatures][bls-ietf-ecdsa-compare].
Over the lifetime of the same Cosmos Hub chain, that would amount to about 1
GiB, a savings of 112 GB. While that is a large factor of reduction it's worth
bearing in mind that, at [GCP's cost][gcp-storage-pricing] of $.026 USD per GB,
that is a total savings of around $2.50 per month.
```

Slightly careful here: I think GCS pricing is in base-10 GB not base-2 GiB, but the order is right. The other thing to consider is that "old" blockchain data can probably use lower-cost storage tiers, since they should presumably be WORM and frequency of reading old data should be relatively low.

(That said: Anyone storing blockchain data in a cloud should probably be asking some fundamental questions about how decentralized their network is, but that's not a concern for this doc)

The other factor to consider is how big the rest of the block is, and in particular what fraction of the block the signature data are. While 113 GiB seems like a lot, if a typical block is much larger than that (100 txn * 1 KiB, say), even that 11 KiB is only about 10% overhead. That might matter, but I think the ratio is more interesting than the raw number.

Author: > (That said: Anyone storing blockchain data in a cloud should probably be asking some fundamental questions about how decentralized their network is, but that's not a concern for this doc)

Fair enough. I was mostly trying to find a decent proxy for 'commodity cost of storing that amount of data' and figured that the GCP value was reasonable. I could certainly go pull up different values and investigate how much it would cost in cold storage vs. mounted volumes etc. but eh I don't think we're there _just_ yet. I think the point of this number is to give a ballpark but I'm happy to expand if it maybe isn't doing its office.

Author: > The other factor to consider is how big the rest of the block is, and in particular what fraction of the block the signature data are. While 113 GiB seems like a lot, if a typical block is much larger than that (100 txn * 1 KiB, say), even that 11 KiB is only about 10% overhead. That might matter, but I think the ratio is more interesting than the raw number.

Not a bad idea, if I get time I'll see if I can find a quick way to pull out a value for that.

#### Reduce Signature Verification Creation and Verification Time

From the [IETF draft standard on BLS Signatures][bls-ietf], BLS signatures can be

> created in 370 microseconds and verified in 2700 microseconds. Our current

Reviewer: I'm not seeing these numbers in that doc. There are a couple of other benchmark links, but I didn't see these specific numbers. Which doc should we be looking at?

Won't the time to create the signature depend on the size of the signing set? (Even if the output size is fixed)

Reviewer: Relatedly: Are these numbers from a specific reference implementation? If we want to compare these to the Go values for our own Ed25519 implementation, we'll probably need to compare to a Go BLS build.

Author: > I'm not seeing these numbers in that doc. There are a couple of other benchmark links, but I didn't see these specific numbers. Which doc should we be looking at?

Those values should be in [section 1.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-bls-signature-04#section-1.1) of the ietf draft on BLS, unless I've linked the wrong document here?

```
The following comparison assumes BLS signatures with curve BLS12-381, targeting 128 bits security. For 128 bits security, ECDSA takes 37 and 79 micro-seconds to sign and verify a signature on a typical laptop.  In comparison, for the same level of security, BLS takes 370 and 2700 micro-seconds to sign and verify a signature.
```

> Relatedly: Are these numbers from a specific reference implementation? If we want to compare these to the Go values for our own Ed25519 implementation, we'll probably need to compare to a Go BLS build.

The doc is pretty unclear on that. [I performed a benchmark](https://github.com/williambanfield/blst/blame/bench/bindings/go/PERFORMANCE.md#L9) using `blst` and linked the results below in the doc, so hopefully those are valuable.

Reviewer: D'oh. I grepped for "microseconds" and "µs" but not "micro-seconds" haha.

That said—my guess is that their reference implementation is probably in C, given the usual practices of IETF.

[Ed25519 implementation][voi-ed25519-perf] lists a 27.5 microsecond signature creation time
and 5.19 milliseconds to perform batch verification on 128 signatures, which is
slightly fewer than the 175 in the hub. blst, a popular implementation of BLS
signature aggregation was benchmarked to perform verification on 100 signatures in
1.5 milliseconds [when run locally][blst-verify-bench] on an 8 thread machine and
pre-aggregated public keys.

#### Reduce Light-Client Verification Time

The light client aims to be a faster and lighter-weight way to verify that a 
block was voted on by a Tendermint network. The light client fetches
Tendermint block headers and commit signatures, performing public key
verification to ensure that the associated validator set signed the block.
Reducing the size of the commit signature would allow the light client to fetch
block data more quickly.

> Additionally, the faster signature verification times of BLS signatures mean

Reviewer: One could also imagine having an optional switch to have nodes compute aggregated signatures separately from consensus, for use by light clients—as far as I can tell there's no reason this has to be done ahead of time, as long as we have the individual inputs in storage somewhere. (Maybe that's wrong)

Author: Yes, I see no issue with this. Aggregation takes separate signatures and combines them, see [the ietf API description](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-bls-signature-04#section-2.8), so there should be no qualm with aggregating them at different points or storing them separately.

that light client verification would proceed more quickly.

#### Reduce Gossip Bandwidth

##### Vote Gossip

> It is possible to aggregate signatures during voting and not need to gossip all 
> *n* validator signatures to all other validators. Theoretically, subsets of
> the signatures could be aggregated during consensus to produce vote messages
> carrying aggregated signatures. Implementations of this would certainly
> increase the complexity of the gossip layer but may possibly reduce the total
> number of signatures required to be verified by each validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to aggregate subsets of signatures during voting, so that the
network need not gossip all *n* validator signatures to all *n* validators.
Theoretically, subsets of the signatures could be aggregated during consensus
and vote messages could carry those aggregated signatures. Implementing this
would certainly increase the complexity of the gossip layer but could possibly
reduce the total number of signatures required to be verified by each validator.
```

For me the most damning part of this idea is dragging fundamental cryptographic key material into the gossip layer.

##### Block Gossip

> A reduction in the block size as a result of signature aggregation would
> naturally lead to a reduction in the bandwidth required to gossip a block.
> Each validator would only send and receive the smaller aggregated signatures
> instead of the full list of multi-signatures as we have them now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reduction in the block size as a result of signature aggregation would
naturally lead to a reduction in the bandwidth required to gossip a block.
Each validator would only send and receive the smaller aggregated signatures
instead of the full list of multi-signatures as we have them now.
```

Maybe. But we could also reduce bandwidth by compressing, and it's quite possible we might save more by doing that than we would by trimming signatures.  If size(compressed(block)+bigbigsig) can be expected to be smaller than size(block+smallsig), we don't need the additional complexity of complicated smallsig for size alone.

(Of course we could then also compress alongsid the small signature too—but the additional savings is then much less obviously worth the very complex and subtle cryptographic work. Compression is bone-simple and well-libraried)

Author: This is a good point and something we should honestly consider whether we do BLS aggregation or _not_. It looks like there's an open issue for this and I'm surprised it hasn't been discussed again more recently. https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/2375

Perhaps it's worth considering as part of the libp2p migration @tychoish

### What are the drawbacks to aggregated signatures?

#### Heterogeneous key types cannot be aggregated

> Only one type of signature can be aggregated and our legacy signing schemes
> cannot be aggregated. In practice, this means that aggregated signatures can
> be created over the set of all validators that use BLS signatures and validators
> with alternative key types, such as Ed25519 must be included separately in
> blocks and votes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregation requires a specific signature algorithm, and our legacy signing schemes
cannot be aggregated. In practice, this means that aggregated signatures could
be created for a subset of validators using BLS signatures, and validators
with other key types (such as Ed25519) would still have to be be separately
propagated in blocks and votes.
```

Related to this: There is a hairy migration problem even for validators that WANT to use the BLS scheme, to get from their current keys to the new thing. 

(Of course, they could hard fork, but are the savings from this likely to justify the network-wide costs of a hard fork?)

#### Many HSMs do not support aggregated signatures

> HSMs or 'Hardware Signing Modules' are a popular way to manage private keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hardware Signing Modules** (HSM) are a popular way to manage private keys.
```

They provide additional security for key management and should be used when
possible for storing highly sensitive private key material.

Below is a list of popular HSMs along with their support for BLS signatures.

* YubiKey
  * [No support][yubi-key-bls-support]
* Amazon Cloud HSM
  * [No support][cloud-hsm-support]
* Ledger
  * [Lists support for the BLS12-381 curve][ledger-bls-announce],

I cannot find support listed for Google Cloud, although perhaps it exists.

## Feasibility of implementation

### Can aggregated signatures be added as soft-upgrades?

> In my estimation, yes. With the implementation of proposer-based timestamps, 

Reviewer: Your reasoning here makes sense, but what's the upgrade path for a validator who wants to swap signature schemes?

Author: Was considering describing this in the doc, but thought it may be a bit overkill.

Briefly, the validator set is modified as a result of the `FinalizeBlock` response. Specifically, the response contains a list of [ValidatorUpdates](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/7243ef71e23f771624a6a6b3b8f55508895ae926/abci/types/types.pb.go#L3806) that replace the current validator set with the updated set. The way to update to the new key type would be to return a new validator in the `ValidatorUpdates` with a BLS key in place of the old validator with the old key type. I'm not certain how key rotation currently works in the cosmos SDK, but what ever scheme we chose would likely look pretty similar. 

Validators would rotate out their old key types for new BLS keys once the functionality was in place in Tendermint. As validators update to BLS keys, Tendermint would include more and more of the validator signatures in the new `AggregatedSignature` portion of the block.

Reviewer: Ah, I see. Does that then imply that either (a) the node has to halt and restart after the last block before that change (so that it can come back up using the correct key and signing algorithm) or (b) that we have to have a rule somewhere to say which signature scheme is being used at which height?

Or if neither of these is right, how does consensus know which key to use?

Author: I was considering that we could allow both simultaneously and allow transfer between one to the other. The node would maintain BLS public keys along with Ed25519 and Secp256k1 keys. It would continue to verify old signatures in the old way, one by one, and, separately, it would verify the whole BLS signature at once.

Author: Signing scheme could check for presence in both:
```
message Commit{
...
  repeated CommitSig signature = 4;
  AggregatedSignature aggregate_signature = 5;
...
}
```

Reviewer: > I was considering that we could allow both simultaneously and allow transfer between one to the other. The node would maintain BLS public keys along with Ed25519 and Secp256k1 keys. It would continue to verify old signatures in the old way, one by one, and, separately, it would verify the whole BLS signature at once.

Right—clearly we still need the ability to verify old signatures regardless, though I guess we shouldn't need to generate new ones and could throw away the private key. So is the idea that if I _have_ a BLS key (at all) I use that for signing any new messages, from that moment forward?

I'm mainly wondering about the transition point: If the operator installs a BLS key "early" (before the network swaps), how do I know when it's time to start using it?

Author: Huzzah! I see what you're asking. How does the local node determine what key to sign with and/or how can it gracefully swap over to that new key. I feel like, to the extent to which that problem will exist in BLS signing, it will already exist now? I can go take a look at the code to see how updating to a new key may be done.

Author: As of now, updating a key would require switching out the new key and restarting Tendermint. There is no clear update path.

as it does now, and produce a set of aggregate signatures from all of the
individual vote signatures.

Implementing 'vote-time' signature aggregation cannot be achieved without
also implementing commit-time signature aggregation. This is because such
signatures cannot be dis-aggregated into their constituent pieces. Therefore,
in order to implement 'vote-time' signature aggregation, we would need to
either first implement 'commit-time' signature aggregation, or implement both
'vote-time' signature aggregation while also updating the block creation and
verification protocols to allow for aggregated signatures.

### Rogue key attack prevention

Generating an aggregated signature requires guarding against what is called
a [rogue key attack][bls-ietf-terms]. A rogue key attack is one in which a
malicious actor can craft an _aggregate_ key that can produce signatures that
appear to include a signature from a private key that the malicious actor
does not actually know. In Tendermint terms, this would look like a Validator
producing a vote signed by both itself and some other validator where the other
validator did not actually produce the vote itself.

> The main mechanisms for preventing this require that each entity prove that it

Reviewer: This sounds like a potential nightmare for operational stability. When nodes join the network, go down and are reconstituted, etc., this seems like it would make a lot of work for the network to affirm the validator's signing capability.

Could a malicious actor simulate a flaky node to make the rest of the network thrash on this verification?

Author: I was considering that validator would store the proof of possession from peer validators using BLS keys. This would likely mean adding it to the new BLS key type as an additional field. This proof of possession would be a few dozen bytes long, so not terribly onerous or difficult to store along size the public key.

Reviewer: Interesting. So is the idea that I verify a bunch of validators once and then sign that verification with my own key so I can later unpack the (stored) result and confirm that the key presented by a(nother) validator coming (back) online is in my set?

Author: Hmm, no. Let me see if I can clarify. If a validator A is joining the network, Tendermint will receive information that it is joining the network by seeing its public key added in a `ValidatorUpdate` through `FinalizeBlock`. A BLS pubkey type would contain a field from the proof of possession. When attempting to join the network, `A` would use its private key to sign the public key and both the public key and the proof of possession would be included in the `ValidatorUpdate`. That way, whenever Tendermint receives a new BLS public key, it must also simultaneously receive its proof of possession.

Author: A validator may then, optionally, store an aggregated public key over all of its known BLS public keys, but that would only be to speed up verification in common cases. Otherwise, it would just store all of the BLS public keys separately.

Reviewer: I see. So anytime a validator comes up (whether it was part of the network before and restarted, or is joining afresh) it will construct a possession proof and propagate that.

It seems like even if the verifier who receives that proof+key pair does have an aggregated signature, it'll need to have the individual key to verify the proof, right? (If not, what would prevent someone from presenting a proof from some other validator, which would then presumably "verify" as being signed by some element of the aggregate, just not the right one?)

Author: > it'll need to have the individual key to verify the proof, right?

Correct. I believe we'll need to store individual keys anyway to create / recreate different aggregated public keys when doing signature verification. Each validator stores individual keys now for each other validator, so I don't think this changes the scope of the validator's responsibility regarding storage of public keys.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, I think the staking module should require the proof of possession. It doesn't technically need to be stored in state, but probably easiest to keep it in state. (its pretty negligible data size increase)

This imo feels like something thats outside the scope of Tendermints responsibility.

Another option though would be to use `Hashed Aggregation Exponents` (https://crypto.stanford.edu/~dabo/pubs/papers/BLSmultisig.html modified scheme in section 2), if we deemed storing these proofs of possessions as undesirable. This acts as a third option to the listed two.

Author: > This imo feels like something thats outside the scope of Tendermints responsibility.

I'm not totally clear that it is, but frankly I think that there are merits to both. Either way, I think it's clear that this doesn't add a massive amount of responsibility to the Tendermint process so I think we can be safe knowing that this is very doable.

their key to the network.

A proof of possession is a message that demonstrates ownership of a private
key. A simple scheme for proof of possession is one where the entity announcing
its new public key to the network includes a digital signature over the bytes
of the public key generated using the associated private key. Everyone receiving
the public key and associated proof-of-possession can easily verify that the
signature and be sure the entity owns the private key.

This proof-of-possession scheme suits the Tendermint use case quite well since
validator keys change infrequently so the associated PoPs would not be onerous
to produce, verify, and store. Using this scheme allows signature verification
to proceed more quickly, since all signatures are over identical data and
can therefore be checked using an aggregated public key instead of one at a
time, public key by public key.

### Backwards Compatibility

Backwards compatibility is an important consideration for signature verification.
Specifically, it is important to consider whether chains using current versions
of IBC would be able to interact with chains adopting BLS.

> Because the Block shared by IBC and Tendermint is produced and parsed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the `Block` shared by IBC and Tendermint is produced and parsed using
```

protobuf, new structures can be added to the Block without breaking the

> ability of legacy users to parse the new structure. Breaking changes between

Reviewer: They can parse it, but if participating in the network requires meaningful work using the new fields, there's still a potential compatibility hitch. (Not a wire breakage, at least, though)

Author: Yes definitely. The scheme I describe here _does_ mean that we could introduce the functionality without simultaneously breaking IBC between old chains if we wanted to go that route. It would be up to peer chains to update to be able to verify peer chains' headers.

Reviewer: That makes sense. It does suggest, though, that if _any_ chain that participates in IBC wants to swap to BLS signatures, _all_ of them will have to for IBC to continue working?

Author: Yes, this, to a degree is the fundamental difficulty of IBC at the moment. All chains are effectively required to be on the latest version to interop. Any update to one forces an update to peer chains or risks becoming disconnected.

Reviewer 4: > if any chain that participates in IBC wants to swap to BLS signatures, all of them (at least those it interops with) will have to for IBC to continue working

Might be useful to add a statement like this into this section since it might not be apparent to all readers

Reviewer 4: For some more context, I discussed with @AdityaSripal how we might actually support upgrading to BLS clients in ibc-go. At the minimum we would need to add a new function to the `ClientState` interface which would allow conversion of a legacy `ClientState` to the new `ClientState`, along with any migration necessary. The new client state would reference the new client implementation which does the BLS verification

These are relatively straightforward changes, but we would need some advance notice on when these changes will be needed. They ideally would be bundled with a new client implementation (such as the BLS verification changes)

cc @crodriguezvega

Author: > These are relatively straightforward changes, but we would need some advance notice on when these changes will be needed.

Of course, we will definitely continue to be very mindful of the disruption this may cause in the context of IBC. Because of the graceful way by which chains would update to BLS, i.e. by swapping out validator keys, I think we should be able to verify block data on either side of the breaking change without serious modification to the light client. The only change would be to the types of commit signatures the client can understand.

current users of IBC and new Tendermint blocks only occur if data that is
relied upon by the current users is no longer included in the current fields.

For the case of BLS aggregated signatures, a new `AggregatedSignature` field
can therefore be added to the `Commit` field without breaking current users.
Current users will be broken when counterparty chains upgrade to the new version
and _begin using_ BLS signatures. Once counterparty chains begin using BLS
signatures, the BlockID hashes will include hashes of the `AggregatedSignature`
data structure that the legacy users will not be able to compute. Additionally,
the legacy software will not be able to parse and verify the signatures to
ensure that a supermajority of validators from the counterparty chain signed
the block.

### Library Support

> BLS signatures creation is limited, although active development appears to be
> ongoing. Cryptographic algorithms are difficult to implement correctly and
> correctness issues are extremely serious and dangerous. No further exploration
> of BLS should be undertaken without strong assurance of a well tested and
> continually supported library for creating and verifying BLS signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Libraries for BLS signature creation are limited in number, although active 
development appears to be ongoing. Cryptographic algorithms are difficult to
implement correctly and correctness issues are extremely serious and dangerous.
No further exploration of BLS should be undertaken without strong assurance of
a well-tested library with continuing support for creating and verifying BLS
signatures.
```

as state updates, the set of data written into the chain and received by the
IBC module would be slightly smaller.

## Discussion

### What are the proposed benefits to aggregated signatures?

#### Reduce Block Size

At the moment, the commit size contains a 512 bit signature for each validator
that voted for the block. For the cosmos hub, which has 175 validators in the
validator set, this amounts to about 11kb per block. That is around 113 GB over
the lifetime of the chain's 10118561 blocks. (Note, the hub has increased the
number of validators in the set over time so the signature size over the history
of the chain is likely less than that value). 

Signature aggregation would only produce two signatures for the entire block.
One for the yays and one for the nays. Each BLS aggregated signature is 48
bytes, per the [IETF standard of BLS signatures][bls-ietf-ecdsa-compare].
Over the lifetime of the same cosmos hub chain, that would amount to about 1
GB, a savings of 112 GB. While that is a large factor of reduction it's worth
bearing in mind that, at [GCP's cost][gcp-storage-pricing] of $.026 USD per GB,
that is a total savings of around $2.50 per month.

> #### Reduce IBC MsgRecvUpdate size

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Adoption

BLS signatures have already gained traction within several popular projects.

* Algorand is working on an implementation.
* [Zcash][zcash-adoption] has adopted BLS12-381 into the protocol.
* [Ethereum 2.0][eth-2-adoption] has adopted BLS12-381 into the protocol.
* [Chia Network][chia-adoption] has adopted BLS for signing blocks.
* [Ostracon][line-ostracon-pr], a fork of Tendermint has adopted BLS for signing blocks.

### What systems may be affected by adding aggregated signatures?

#### Gossip

Gossip could be updated to aggregate vote signatures during a consensus round.
This appears to be of frankly little utility. Creating an aggregated signature
incurs overhead, so frequently re-aggregating may incur a significant
overhead. How costly this is is still subject to further investigation and
performance testing.

Even if vote signatures were aggregated before gossip, each validator would still
need to receive and verify vote extension data from each (individual) peer validator in 
order for consensus to proceed. That displaces any advantage gained by aggregating signatures across the vote message in the presence of vote extensions.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think that there are two main questions here, that should be considered independently.

First, the ability to aggregate votes should improve performance but the cost of aggregating signatures should definitely be considered in the equation. Notice that by aggregating single votes into a multi-vote messages, we don't only reduce the network overhead of sending multiple messages that are identical, but we also potentially speed up consensus. The problem is that, when considering that messages are signed, and are exactly signatures the only distinction between similar votes, the cost of aggregating signatures becomes a crucial element.

Putting this first point in a possibly simpler way. If vote messages were not signed, I think that no one would disagree that aggregating votes in the scale at which we run Tendermint would be clearly beneficial in terms of performance. However, messages are signed, and message signing and verification are probably the most expensive operations in this protocol. So, the cost of aggregating signatures + the cost of verifying aggregated signatures should be balanced with the existing costs of producing and verifying individual signatures. With today's technology and implementations, it appears that aggregated signatures are definitely effective when they can replace something like 100 individual signatures, and there is some discussion of the actual effect when replacing less, say around 40-60 signatures. But, below such thresholds, like mentioned in the text, this strategy does not pay off.

The second point, which is very important but somehow orthogonal, is about the design decision that was made of including additional, not redundant information on vote messages (e.g. vote extensions). I think that some of the appeal of this approach comes from the fact that we need "in any case" to propagate lots of vote messages, that are mostly identical, so why not use them for something else? This argument would be much less appealing if signature/vote aggregation was already adopted by Tendermint consensus.

Reviewer 2: An additional information regarding the second point above. Notice that is possible to aggregate signatures on different messages, so adding non-redundant content to votes messages does not necessarily prevent the adoption of BLS signatures. Of course, this is a different user case, yet to be considered in terms of feasibility/efficiency.

Author: > However, messages are signed, and message signing and verification are probably the most expensive operations in this protocol.

I'm not totally convinced that this is true, at least _in the case of consensus_. In blocksync and light client verification, it may be true that the slow piece is signature verification but in consensus I'm less sure. Consensus involves sending a small packet of data to dozens or hundreds of networked nodes. Network transmission times in distributed networks are going to be in the dozens of milliseconds per message at least so it seems to me that the slow step in consensus is really transmitting vote information, not verifying signatures, which should be on the order of microseconds or nanoseconds per signature.

> I think that some of the appeal of this approach comes from the fact that we need "in any case" to propagate lots of vote messages, that are mostly identical, so why not use them for something else?

I would tend to agree. While the messages are called 'vote extensions' I do think we have a bit of freedom with their actually design and propagation. If we find a faster way to propagate all of the data that is not necessarily by putting them on the same message, that would certainly work.

> First, the ability to aggregate votes should improve performance but the cost of aggregating signatures should definitely be considered in the equation.

This is raising an important / interesting point. Signature and vote aggregation are somewhat orthogonal. Since, in Tendermint v0.36+, all validators sign over the same data, there isn't much need to retransmit all of the same information each time. We could certainly create combined vote messages that simultaneously transmit many signatures without including height/round/step information multiple times.

IBC would no longer need to transmit a large set of signatures when
updating state. These state updates do not happen for every IBC packet, only
when changing an IBC light client's view of the counterparty chain's state.
General [IBC packets][ibc-packet] only contain enough information to correctly
route the data to the counterparty chain.

IBC does persist commit signatures to the chain in these `MsgUpdateClient`
message when updating state. This message would no longer need the full set
of unique signatures and would instead only need one signature for all of the
data in the header.

Adding BLS signatures would create a new signature type that must be
understood by the IBC module and by the relayers. For some operations, such
as state updates, the set of data written into the chain and received by the
IBC module could be slightly smaller.

## Discussion

### What are the proposed benefits to aggregated signatures?

#### Reduce Block Size

At the moment, a commit contains a 64-byte (512-bit) signature for each validator
that voted for the block. For the Cosmos Hub, which has 175 validators in the
active set, this amounts to about 11 KiB per block. That gives an upper bound of

> around 113 GiB over the lifetime of the chain's 10.12M blocks. (Note, the hub has

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
around 113 GiB over the lifetime of the chain's 10.12M blocks. (Note, the Hub has
```

increased the number of validators in the active set over time so the total
signature size over the history of the chain is likely somewhat less than that).

Signature aggregation would only produce two signatures for the entire block.
One for the yeas and one for the nays. Each BLS aggregated signature is 48
bytes, per the [IETF standard of BLS signatures][bls-ietf-ecdsa-compare].

> Over the lifetime of the same cosmos hub chain, that would amount to about 1

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over the lifetime of the same Cosmos Hub chain, that would amount to about 1
```

GB, a savings of 112 GB. While that is a large factor of reduction it's worth
bearing in mind that, at [GCP's cost][gcp-storage-pricing] of $.026 USD per GB,

> that is a total savings of around $2.50 per month.

Reviewer 5: It can actually be one signature total, not sure if this is an important detail. (You can aggregate signatures for different messages as well)

Author: That's a great point! Thanks Dev. I _believe_ that this would actually cut down a pairing to be 3 instead of 4 in the 2 signature version as well.

#### Reduce Signature Creation and Verification Time

From the [IETF draft standard on BLS Signatures][bls-ietf], BLS signatures can be
created in 370 microseconds and verified in 2700 microseconds. Our current
[Ed25519 implementation][voi-ed25519-perf] lists a 27.5 microsecond signature creation time

> and 5.19 milliseconds to perform batch verification on 128 signatures, which is

Reviewer 6: A few notes:

 - The numbers in that document are only really intended to be used for comparison between the primitives I benchmarked due to ` i7-10510U @ 1.80GHz with turbo disabled`, which cripples an already not-amazing mobile part for consistency.

 - Tendermint will use the "Precomputed verification" optimization (or at least, it did when I upstreamed the library switch), because the time-memory tradeoff is worth it in a consensus context (~3.91ms).  (And the blst go benchmark likewise pre-aggregates the public key).

A quick and dirty unscientific test on a Ryzen 5600X (with PBO enabled) looks like this:
```
BenchmarkExpanded/VerifyBatchOnly/128-12          	     662	   2250318 ns/op	  192704 B/op	      17 allocs/op
BenchmarkVerifyFastAggregateUncompressedMinSig/100_G1-12       	    1094	   1166317 ns/op
```

So my nitpicking is somewhat moot, since BLS signature verification is still faster. but the gap isn't quite as big, though the more interesting (to me) parts about using BLS signatures is the size/bandwidth savings.

Author: Thank you so much for that notes @Yawning ! It may be worth then re-running these benchmarks on my machine to compare more directly with the numbers here for BLS signatures.

Author: Performed this benchmark and noted the findings in this document. I also benchmarked key _aggregation_ times using _blst_ on different numbers of keys and determined that the cost of aggregating a key in a `bls` scheme appears to be expensive.

> slightly fewer than the 175 in the hub. blst, a popular implementation of BLS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
slightly fewer than the 175 in the Hub. blst, a popular implementation of BLS
```

signatures cannot be dis-aggregated into their constituent pieces. Therefore,
in order to implement 'vote-time' signature aggregation, we would need to
either first implement 'commit-time' signature aggregation, or implement both
'vote-time' signature aggregation while also updating the block creation and
verification protocols to allow for aggregated signatures.

### Rogue key attack prevention

Generating an aggregated signature requires guarding against what is called
a [rogue key attack][bls-ietf-terms]. A rogue key attack is one in which a
malicious actor can craft an _aggregate_ key that can produce signatures that
appear to include a signature from a private key that the malicious actor
does not actually know. In Tendermint terms, this would look like a Validator
producing a vote signed by both itself and some other validator where the other
validator did not actually produce the vote itself.

The main mechanisms for preventing this require that each entity prove that it
can can sign data with just their private key. The options involve either
ensuring that each entity sign a _different_ message when producing every

> signature _or_ producing a [proof of possession][bls-ietf-pop] when announcing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
signature _or_ producing a [proof of possession][bls-ietf-pop] (PoP) when announcing
```

their key to the network.

A proof of possession is a message that demonstrates ownership of a private
key. A simple scheme for proof of possession is one where the entity announcing
its new public key to the network includes a digital signature over the bytes
of the public key generated using the associated private key. Everyone receiving

> the public key and associated proof-of-possession can easily verify that the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the public key and associated proof-of-possession can easily verify the
```

`AggregatedSignature` and `Signatures` field was enough to commit the block
during block validation. One can certainly imagine other possible schemes for
implementing this but the above should serve as a simple enough proof of concept.

### Implementing vote-time and commit-time signature aggregation separately

Implementing aggregated BLS signatures as part of the block structure can easily be
achieved without implementing any 'vote-time' signature aggregation.
The block proposer would gather all of the votes, complete with signatures,
as it does now, and produce a set of aggregate signatures from all of the
individual vote signatures.

Implementing 'vote-time' signature aggregation cannot be achieved without
also implementing commit-time signature aggregation. This is because such
signatures cannot be dis-aggregated into their constituent pieces. Therefore,
in order to implement 'vote-time' signature aggregation, we would need to
either first implement 'commit-time' signature aggregation, or implement both
'vote-time' signature aggregation while also updating the block creation and
verification protocols to allow for aggregated signatures.

> ### Rogue key attack prevention

Reviewer 7: I am not an expert in cryptography. So the following question might be because I am uninformed. Anyway: I tried to follow the arguments, and I am not sure I understand the context of this section. This section is  on "attack prevention" within the section on "Feasibility of implementation". So I would like to understand:
1. Is "Rogue key attack" the only attack there is/we are concerned about? 
2. Is there a (complete) list of attacks we need to handle? 
3. Are there properties (we can check/verify/test) that the implementation needs to satisfy to prevent attacks.
4. If there are properties in 3., then this question is not really an "implementation issue". Rather we would need to specify what defines a "correct implementation", and then we need to do the implementation against this specification.

Reviewer 2: While I agree with your reasoning, I would say that worrying about this particular attack is mostly a implementation decision.

BLS is generically used to aggregate signatures, produced by different sources for arbitrary messages. If the message signed by the different sources is the same, it is possible to use an optimized signature-verification procedure, that substantially improve the performance of BLS (from `n+1` pairings for `n` signatures, to only `2` pairings). For a safe use of this optimized signature-verification procedure, we need to prevent malicious participants from generating arbitrary on-demand public-keys, not associated to a valid private key. Since in Tendermint the set of keys used to sign and verify messages in known in advance, it is the validator set, the rogue key attack seems ineffective in our scenario. However, we probably need to revisit the procedure we use to add a new validator key to the validators set, which is currently managed by the application, not the consensus layer.

Author: > Is "Rogue key attack" the only attack there is/we are concerned about?

This is the main attack referenced by all research papers. Having private keys be stolen is certainly something we should be worried about but that consideration is also a current concern.

There does appear to be another attack that exists called the 'Summing Zero' attack, whereby colluding signers can create an aggregated public key that is equal to 'Zero'. The colluding signers can attach the same individual signatures to _any_ data and have the aggregated signature verify against the aggregation of the signers' public keys. This can leave open the possibility of double signing attacks since identical signatures would validate different data. On the flip side, this would also cause colluding signers to always appear to be double signing, since their aggregated public key would always verify data. This would, in effect, allow them to be slashed into oblivion if detected because honest validators could create an evidence for arbitrary messages using the aggregated public keys.

For more information on summing zero attacks, see
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/323.pdf

Author: Added an additional section to describe this. It is not clear to be at this time if all reasonable attack vectors on BLS aggregated signatures are discussed in the literature at this time.

* **Short Signature**: A signature that does not vary in length with the
number of signers.
* **Multi-Signature**: A signature generated over a single message
where, given the message and signature, a verifier is able to determine that
all parties signed the message. May be short or may vary with the number of signers.
* **Aggregated Signature**: A _short_ signature generated over messages with
possibly different content where, given the messages and signature, a verifier
should be able to determine that all the parties signed the designated messages.
* **Threshold Signature**: A _short_ signature generated from multiple signers
where, given a message and the signature, a verifier is able to determine that
a large enough share of the parties signed the message. The identities of the
parties that contributed to the signature are not revealed.
* **BLS Signature**: An elliptic-curve pairing-based signature system that
has some nice properties for short multi-signatures. May stand for
*Boneh-Lynn-Schacham* or *Barreto-Lynn-Scott* depending on the context. A
BLS signature is type of signature scheme that is distinct from other forms
of elliptic-curve signatures such as ECDSA and EdDSA.

> * **Interactive**: Cryptographic scheme where parties need to perform one or

Reviewer: We don't seem to make any reference to interactive vs. non-interactive in the rest of the document.

more request-response cycles to produce the cryptographic material. For
example, an interactive signature scheme may require the signer and the
verifier to cooperate to create and/or verify the signature, rather than a
signature being created ahead of time.
* **Non-interactive**: Cryptographic scheme where parties do not need to
perform any request-response cycles to produce the cryptographic material.

### Brief notes on pairing-based elliptic-curve cryptography

Pairing-based elliptic-curve cryptography is quite complex and relies on several
types of high-level math. Cryptography, in general, relies on being able to find
problems with an asymmetry between the difficulty of calculating the solution
and verifying that a given solution is correct.

Pairing-based cryptography works by operating on mathematical functions that
satisfy the property of **bilinear mapping**. This property is satisfied for
functions `e` with values `P`, `Q`, and `R` where `e(P, Q + R) = e(P, Q) * e(P, R)`

> and `e(P + Q, R) = e(P, R) * e(Q, R)`. The most familiar example of this is

Reviewer: We need to be slightly careful about notation here. In the (modular) exponentiation case, the mapping only works if P, Q, and R are points in the group, e.g., `P = g^p`, `Q = g^q`, `R = g^r` for some base g (possibly modulo M). Then it is true that `P^(q+r) = (g^p)^(q+r) = (g^pq)*(g^pr) = P^q * P^r`, but the exponents are what distributes across the mapping. (And the symmetry is slightly subtle)

This is a relatively minor point, since we aren't doing anything with the arithmetic elsewhere in the doc, but it's probably worth ensuring the example is correct.

Author: huzzah, ok. updated a bit.

naturally lead to a reduction in the bandwidth required to gossip a block.
Each validator would only send and receive the smaller aggregated signatures
instead of the full list of multi-signatures as we have them now.

### What are the drawbacks to aggregated signatures?

#### Heterogeneous key types cannot be aggregated

Aggregation requires a specific signature algorithm, and our legacy signing schemes
cannot be aggregated. In practice, this means that aggregated signatures could
be created for a subset of validators using BLS signatures, and validators
with other key types (such as Ed25519) would still have to be be separately
propagated in blocks and votes.

#### Many HSMs do not support aggregated signatures

**Hardware Signing Modules** (HSM) are a popular way to manage private keys.
They provide additional security for key management and should be used when
possible for storing highly sensitive private key material.

Below is a list of popular HSMs along with their support for BLS signatures.

* YubiKey
  * [No support][yubi-key-bls-support]
* Amazon Cloud HSM
  * [No support][cloud-hsm-support]
* Ledger

>   * [Lists support for the BLS12-381 curve][ledger-bls-announce]

Reviewer 8: ledger currently only knows to generate keys

Author: Mind elaborating or linking to a source on this? I found it difficult to find sources of information around Ledger when trying to put this together.

The main mechanisms for preventing this require that each entity prove that it
can can sign data with just their private key. The options involve either
ensuring that each entity sign a _different_ message when producing every
signature _or_ producing a [proof of possession][bls-ietf-pop] (PoP) when announcing
their key to the network.

A PoP is a message that demonstrates ownership of a private
key. A simple scheme for PoP is one where the entity announcing
its new public key to the network includes a digital signature over the bytes
of the public key generated using the associated private key. Everyone receiving
the public key and associated proof-of-possession can easily verify the
signature and be sure the entity owns the private key.

This PoP scheme suits the Tendermint use case quite well since
validator keys change infrequently so the associated PoPs would not be onerous
to produce, verify, and store. Using this scheme allows signature verification
to proceed more quickly, since all signatures are over identical data and
can therefore be checked using an aggregated public key instead of one at a
time, public key by public key.

> ### Summing Zero Attacks

Reviewer 8: Is this a problem in practice?
It's conceptually equivalent to the validators posting their private keys

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is because we have a combinatorial number of possible combinations of public keys. This procedure as efficient as more often we can re-use the same aggregated public key. In case of Tendermint, a valid commit contains `>=2/3n`signatures from `n`  vote-power-equivalent validators. This is still a considerably high number of possible combinations.

[Summing zero attacks][summing-zero-paper] are attacks that rely on using the '0' point of an
elliptic curve. For BLS signatures, if the point 0 is chosen as the private
key, then the 0 point will also always be the public key and all signatures
produced by the key will also be the 0 point. This is easy enough to
detect when verifying each signature individually.

However, because BLS signature aggregation creates an aggregated signature and
an aggregated public key, a set of colluding signers can create a pair or set

> of signatures that aggregate to 0. The signatures that sum zero along with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of signatures that are non-zero but which aggregate ("sum") to 0. The signatures that sum zero along with the
```

a well-tested library with continuing support for creating and verifying BLS
signatures.

At the moment, there is one candidate, `blst`, that appears to be the most
mature and well vetted. While this library is undergoing continuing auditing
and is supported by funds from the Ethereum foundation, adopting a new cryptographic
library presents some serious risks. Namely, if the support for the library were
to be discontinued, Tendermint may become saddle with the requirement of supporting
a very complex piece of software or force a massive ecosystem-wide migration away
from BLS signatures.

#### Go Standard Library

The Go Standard library has no implementation of BLS signatures.

#### BLST

[blst][blst], or 'blast' is an implementation of BLS signatures written in C
that provides bindings into Go as part of the repository. This library is
actively undergoing formal verification by Galois and previously received an
initial audit by NCC group, a firm I'd never heard of.

`blst` is [targeted for use in prysm][prysm-blst], the golang implementation of Ethereum 2.0.

#### Gnark-Crypto

[Gnark-Crypto][gnark] is a Go-native implementation of elliptic-curve pairing-based

> cryptography. It is completely not auditing and listed as an 'as-is' although

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cryptography. It is not audited and is documented as 'as-is', although
```

Author: I love that my attentional systems sometimes reorient in the middle of a sentence. Incredible brain mechanism I've got here.

development appears to be active so formal verification may be forthcoming.

## Open Questions

* *Q*: Can you aggregate a signature twice and still verify?
* *Q*: If so, how much cost may be imposed by re-including signatures into the same

> * *Q*: Can you aggregate Ed25519 signatures in Tendermint?

Reviewer: Not just in Tendermint—is there an (any) aggregation scheme for ed25519?

Reviewer 2: In thesis, aggregation is possible for some families of elliptic curves, and ed.... is based on this technology. I think the point here, one of the challenges, it is to find "an" elliptic curve that allows for efficient aggregation while does not provide very poor performance for regular (single signature) singing and verification.

Reviewer 5: Yeah there is one that works, you save ~50% on signature size for a batch of signatures. So a factor of 2 space savings, and some linear factor savings in computation. #7892

Author: added reference to the doc.

cryptography. It is not audited and is documented as 'as-is', although
development appears to be active so formal verification may be forthcoming.

#### CIRCL

[CIRCL][circl] is a go-native implementation of several cryptographic primitives,
bls12-381 among them. The library is written and maintained by Cloudflare and
appears to receive frequent contributions. However, it lists itself as experimental
and urges users to take caution before using it in production.

### Light Client Change

Implementing BLS signature aggregation in Tendermint would pose issues for the
light client. The light client currently validates a subset of the signatures
on a block when performing the verification algorithm. This is no longer possible

> with an aggregated signature. Aggregated signature verification is all-or-nothing.

Reviewer 9: The function that checks this is also called form the [evidence reactor](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dd4fee88ef6e4e0e5cf8eab0bf5a3e078df355c9/internal/evidence/verify.go#L177) (and currently I added it into the blocksync verification, but we can discuss this).
